---
layout: blog
title: COPPER 3.0 released
author: Dirk
categories: releases
---

The top item of this 3.0 release is that **we changed COPPER’s toplevel package** from `de.scoopgmbh.copper` to `org.copperengine`.

Other than that the public API is unchanged (almost, see below). If you are using COPPER then you can easily migrate your project by changing all `import` statements from `de.scoopgmbh.copper` to either `org.copperengine.core` (if the class resides in copperengine-core.jar) or `org.copperengine` (otherwise).

If you have persistent workflows, don't worry that the persisted stackframes might contain references to old classes in the `de.scoopgmbh.*` package: we got you covered. Whenever COPPER loads a persistent workflow instance (or response) it transforms the package name automatically during load time -- no further intervention neccessary.

**Other changes, compared to the last stable release 2.4.3**

- Refactoring: Renamed COPPER major Throwable from "de.scoopgmbh.copper.InterruptException" to "org.copperengine.core.Interrupt". Persistent workflow instances and responses in existing databases keep compatible due to a loadtime adaptation feature - see StandardJavaSerializer.classnameReplacement
- Refactoring: All Spring supporting classes have been moved to an own subproject: copper-spring. Attention! SpringTransactionController and SpringTxnAuditTrail have been moved to another package
- Refactoring: de.scoopgmbh.copper.audit.BatchingAuditTrail does no longer implement spring's InitializingBean. This makes copper less dependent on spring stuff.
- Refactoring: de.scoopgmbh.copper.Response.internalProcessingTimeout changed from Integer to Long to enable really LONG timeouts
- Refactoring: Renamed table ADAPTERCALL to COP_ADAPTERCALL, renamed index IX_ADAPTERCALL to COP_IDX_ADAPTERCALL
- New feature: Added new wait methods, e.g. de.scoopgmbh.copper.Workflow.wait(WaitMode, long, TimeUnit, String...)
- New feature: COPPER now uses the Eclipse compiler ecj (or any other JSR-199 compatible java compiler) when found on the CLASSPATH and the default Java compiler is not available. Thus you can run COPPER on a normal JRE instead of a full JDK, ie. you no longer need to provide tools.jar as long as you add ecj.jar to your runtime dependencies.
- Bugfix: Issue #26: Removed commons-logging from dependencies
- Bugfix: Issue #25: Removed log4j dependency from copper-coreengine
- COPPER is now available as a Maven dependency on Maven Central

You can get it here:
[https://github.com/copper-engine/copper-engine/releases/tag/3.0](https://github.com/copper-engine/copper-engine/releases/tag/3.0)